Taking a note book from her bag, and adjusting her spectacles, the old
lady began her remarkable relation of events to come ere the 21st
century shall have rolled around:

"Of course," she began, "I may not be able to tell you all that is in
store for future generations, but I will say enough to interest
everybody and to warn everybody who will care to heed my admonitions.

"The era of quick transit has already arrived and people love to travel
fast, and opportunity will be given all who care to adopt this pastime.
Very soon the locomotive and trolley car will be altogether too slow for
travel and aerial voyages, both for pleasure and business will ensue.
The force used for this purpose will be varied and may be electricity,
gasoline, compressed air, or perhaps still another potent agent, at
present undeveloped, which will usurp the place of all others, be
cheaper, safer and more reliable than any known energy. The cars will be
made entirely of steel bands and so constructed that but little damage
may be apprehended from a collision with another flying machine. A
parachute, arranged to work automatically will be the chief protector of
this winged machine and this part of the apparatus will be so
constructed as to render an accident almost an impossibility. Indeed,
these carriers will be so made that a party soaring in the air at a
height of 500 feet will look down and express a feeling of sympathy for
those who must brave the dangers besetting life on the surface of this
mundane sphere.

"These air carriers will be simple, and a good bright boy can
manufacture his own vehicle to take him to and from school and at a less
expense per day than is now paid for street car fare, and at a lesser
risk to life and limb. The grocer will make his deliveries by his air
machine. The butcher boy will abandon his automobile and bring his meat
deliveries by the way the bird flies. As there can be no tracks laid in
the air, no one will be pestering the City Commission for a franchise to
run his company's cars over a certain strata of air, but there will be
cars for hire, just the same, and there will be, no doubt, long trains
operated in the air not much unlike the system at present in vogue on
the surface. The death dealing automobile will be a thing of the past
and even the merry motor cycle will have gone the way of the equine.
Railroads and railroad stocks will suffer and the roads will languish
and die. Aerial locomotion will usurp the place of the steamer and the
steamship, since it will be proven to be quicker, safer and less
expensive. Country homes will be easy of access and, consequently, more
popular and the suburbs will be peopled by an ever-increasing number.
There is no end to the advantages which the flying machine possesses
over the present modes of locomotion and it is merely a question of
solving the problem of entire safety, economy and simplicity of
construction and operation, all of which will have been surmounted in
A. D. 1999.

"Although the aerial navigation is itself an important feature of future
progress, it is not at all the most prominent of innovations. I will
tell you of the new era of building.

"Portland in 1913 was considered a beautiful city, but how much more
beautiful does it look in 1999. I will endeavor to give you a little
idea.

"The wooden houses have become a thing of the past and strong, warm
concrete dwellings are the order of the day. These abodes although
immensely superior to the dwellings of 1913 are less in cost and more
adaptable for homes. Every working man has his own flying machine and
his own home and should be happy and comfortable. The city is compact
and the business houses are lofty and well constructed, safety to
occupants being the chief care.

"Owing to the fact that there are few, if any, automobiles or other
rapid methods of travel to take up the streets of our city, there was an
order issued by the City Commissioners removing the hard surface
pavements and authorizing the Commissioner of Public Service to sow the
streets in rye grass and Kentucky blue grass, so that the city of
Portland is one perpetual system of parks, where the youngster may play
to his heart's content. Just imagine what a beautiful city we have and
how our past day metropolis would pale into insignificance beside the
picture I have drawn. Roses are planted in the streets and we are really
and truly the 'Rose City'."

At this juncture the old lady paused to consult some notes which she
read to herself, presently beginning again, this time with a new topic:

"Emigration flocked to Oregon after the opening of the Panama canal and
under the new conditions many of these newcomers settled in and around
Portland. The great territory of Alaska has been pretty thoroughly
prospected and our city is the chief market for that great and wonderful
country. Our population equals or surpasses that of Greater New York in
1913 and there is work for everyone. Portland embraces the entire county
of Multnomah and a portion of other adjacent counties and extends in an
unbroken line from Oregon City on the South to the delta of the Columbia
river on the North, East to the foot of Mt. Hood and West to Hillsboro.
There are no more bridges across the Willamette river, tubes 75 feet
wide at every other street taking the place of the bridges. These tubes
are about a mile in length and start from Broadway on the West side and
extend to Grand avenue on the East. Public docks extend from St. Johns
to Milwaukie and cover both sides of the river, which is dredged the
entire length of the dockage.

"Many of the hills back of the city, including Portland Heights, Kings
Heights and Willamette Heights are leveled, only Council Crest with its
historic traditions being allowed to remain. This gives a vast area to
West Portland which is really vital to its business supremacy. Columbia
Slough was reclaimed and most of the manufacturing industries are
carried on at that point. St. Johns was again taken into the fold and
made happy."

Again did the old lady consult her notes, making a selection for a new
topic, smilingly began:

"The old Commission form of government inaugurated in 1913 proved a
success in every way. The first Mayor under the Commission, H. Russell
Albee, with his quartette of capable assistants, Messrs. Wm. H. Daly,
W. M. Brewster, R. G. Dieck and C. A. Bigelow set the pace for their
under officials who tried to emulate their superiors' good work, the
public reaping splendid results therefrom. Each succeeding
administration endeavored to excel the former's record and Portland has
been well governed for the past 86 years. Auditor Barbur, too, gave the
city the fruits of his ripe experience in municipal matters and was
rewarded by being elected again and again. When the city swallowed up
the county of Multnomah, additional commissioners were necessary to take
care of the increased business, and so popular did this system of
government become with the people that a State Commission form of
government was agitated and finally adopted. The Governor and his
Cabinet, composed of 12 commissioners were moved to Portland which
became the state capitol. The State Commission had the power to enact
laws and possessed all the functions of a state legislature, meeting
each day to pass upon matters which might come up for discussion or
adjustment. The Governor serving in 1913, Oswald West declined the
honor of running on a state commission basis and that privilege fell to
Robert Stevens who safely guided the bark of Oregon through the
breakers.

"The long list of state officials embraces many names familiar to the
public in the earlier part of this century, notably, the names of
Sewall, Malarkey, Coffey, Word, Selling, Lane, Chamberlain, Gatens,
Bourne, Nebergall, Lightner, Lombard, Rushlight and many others whose
names were highly esteemed in Portland's early history.

"The city, county and state buildings embrace five continuous blocks
beginning at Jefferson Street running north, taking in Madison, Main,
Salmon, Taylor and Yamhill Streets, each building being ten stories high
and connected at each third story with its companion on the opposite
side of the street for a distance of five blocks, making it practically
one solid building five blocks long and each building ten stories high.

"There are fifteen judges of the circuit court, seven of whom are women.
The sheriff and treasurer are women and there are several women serving
as bailiffs.

"The name of Abigail Scott Duniway is held in much reverence by these
women officials, who attribute to her the honor of being the promoter of
woman suffrage in Oregon.

"Many innovations have been made in the laws of Oregon during the last
50 years, a number of them being framed and mothered by women State
Commissioners and signed by Oregon's women governors. One of these acts
makes it lawful for a woman to retain her own name, if she so desires
after her marriage and not making it compulsory for her to take her
husband's name, so that if Miss Montmorenci marries Bill Smith, she is
not necessarily compelled to assume her husband's name of Smith, but can
be known as 'Mrs. Helen Smith-Montmorenci.' This act has been the
occasion of a number of our high-toned girls with four syllable names
marrying men of plebeian extraction, so the law works well.

"The morals of the city have wonderfully improved. There is less
roystering, riotousness and lawlessness than existed earlier in the
century. There is no longer a Home of Detention for boys and girls,
Florence Crittenden Home, a county or city jail, or a state
penitentiary, all of these institutions being done away with as they
were found unnecessary, expensive and not able to deal with the
situation in hand. Instead, a more Christlike form of dealing with the
socalled lawless element has been inaugurated and the fruits became
immediately apparent. Alleged criminals were talked to like brothers and
treated like brothers, the hard spot in the hearts of each melting,
when, indeed, they did become like brothers. Men on the rock pile were
taken by the hand by good and true men and women and made to feel that
life had something in it besides crime, and all became ready and anxious
to better their conditions and their morals and the Brotherhood of Man
became established on earth in its truest significance.

"And so it was in handling the social evil. None were so vile but would
like to leave their sins; and a revolution for the good was started
which has ever since continued. And this is the reason we have no homes
for criminals, for we have no more criminals. Isn't that lovely?" and
the dear old lady smiled.

Continuing, she said, "The art of 'moving picture' shows has given place
to the science of 'motion picture' shows. We will say that a rendition
of 'Shylock' is given in New York on Monday. The following Monday, the
very same performance can be produced in Portland, with a counterpart of
the actors' figures, voices, stage setting, even to the minutest
particular, and it would be difficult for one seeing both performances
to tell which was the original and which the copy.

"Owing to the little need for an elaborate education, children are not
compelled to go higher than the sixth grade, the rest of their education
being made up by practical experience later in life. This, however,
does not extend to those seeking professional lives who are at liberty
to use their time as they choose.

"Fourth of July, 1999, was celebrated in a way that the men and women of
former days would marvel at. The air was filled with vehicles of all
kinds and descriptions. They all invaded the air from the little tad of
four years of age, who is riding in space at a height of five feet just
within reach of his parent's arms, to the more daring air rider who
soars the skies, at an elevation of 10,000 feet. There were no fireworks
but there was plenty of visiting above ground and music from 50,000
phonographs was listened to. One mighty band was playing national airs,
and although more than a century and a half has elapsed since the
anthem was written, the 'Star Spangled Banner' was received in the usual
way. There are some new national hymns, but the olden ones seem to be
the most popular.

"The Rose Festival was celebrated two weeks prior to this event. The
celebration was unique and embraced a pageant in the air, the electric
parade being the feature of the day. A genuine shower of roses let fall
at a given signal from tens of thousands of airships filled the air with
delightful perfume and the spectators with enthusiasm. The performance
was given three days in succession. A reminiscent figure of the third
day's parade was a picture made in flowers and exhibited at a height of
1,000 feet above the ground showing a picture of the first president of
the Rose Festival, who was none other than our dear old friend, Ralph
W. Hoyt.

"What might appear to the people of 1913 as very extraordinary, is the
manner in which the streets of the city are sprinkled. A huge air bag
with a rubber hose attachment is allowed to rise to a height of about
1,000 feet and water from the Willamette river is pumped up into it by
the good old fire boat, David Campbell, which is still doing business.

"Attached to the air bag is a regular sprinkling machine and as fast as
the David Campbell pumps the water into the bag it is allowed to fall on
the city, the air bag, of course, frequently shifting its position to
give all parts of the city an equal show for a rain storm. This process
is used whenever there is a drought in Multnomah county, which, thank
the Lord, is a seldom occurrence.

"Journalism has kept apace with the times and the Oregonian is still
doing business at the old stand but it now occupies the entire block.
The names of Scott and Pittock are synonymous with that of the
Oregonian.

"The Journal has taken its place among the foremost papers of the day
and it, too, covers a whole block on its present site. It is a monument
to the energy and business sagacity of Mr. C. S. Jackson.

"The Daily News proved a paying venture and is among the city's
institutions.

"The Sunday Mercury has long since ceased publication on Sunday,
becoming a thriving morning paper.

"The Evening Telegram grew so fast that it was compelled to move to more
commodious quarters and occupies that building once known as the
Portland Hotel, which ceased to be a hostelry in 1953. The Telegram
utilizes the entire building which is proof sufficient of its
prosperity.

"The Guide, a little sheet devoted to general information for the
public is still published by a gentleman, named Stuart, and gives out
correct data as in years gone by.

"Much of the good in Socialism has been incorporated in the politics of
the state, and the objectionable part of the doctrines were eschewed.
The best ideas of all parties now enter into politics, which goes to
show that there was good in all.

"One-half of the police force are women, who dress in uniform and there
is a day shift and a night shift of these women police, and the idea
works well.

"Owing to sanitary conditions somewhat, but rather to a change of mind
and morals, there is comparatively little sickness now prevailing in
Oregon. Ever since the year 1933, when the State of Oregon passed a bill
making it a criminal offense for anyone to recommend or prescribe
deleterious drugs in the cure of diseases, the number of doctors using
medicines have fallen off and drug stores are no longer run under that
name, and the health of young and old has wonderfully improved. The
science of curing broken limbs still continues to be practiced but these
surgeons acknowledge that drugs and medicines have lost their potency as
a curative agent.

"Men and women dress very differently from former days.

"The tube skirt is surely a thing of the past and pictures of a 1913
belle dressed in a 'tube' is put on the moving pictures when it is
particularly desirous to raise some merriment, even if it be done at the
expense of one's great grandmother.

"The ladies dress in more of an Oriental style which is very becoming
and which allows them more individuality of design.

"The men and boys have gone back to the old Knickerbocker style of dress
and they look very natty in their new attire.

"One never sees a horse any more and that species of animal is well nigh
extinct. To be sure, there are some to be found at the city parks and
they are as much fondled and caressed by the youthful visitor there as
was the pet lamb that Mary took to school. The horses' day as a beast of
burden is over, thank God.

"There are but few of the old stock of Indians left and these are very
proud. Much is being made of them by the whites, who look up to them as
being the 'First families of America.' Their numbers are few and there
is an effort being exerted to preserve and propagate what is left of
them.

"There is a sprinkle of Chinese and Japanese in the city but the little
people have long since passed the stage of 'undesirables.' They, too,
have had a change of heart and have stopped all their objectionable ways
and have become as good citizens as those of the 'most favored nation.'

"The Chinamen, more particularly have fallen into the customs of the
white neighbors and a much better feeling is manifest on both sides,
which knocks the dreaded bugaboo about the 'yellow peril.' Both Japanese
and Chinese affect the American style of dress, even to the knee pants.
Just fancy that!"

Illustration: End of Chapter 2.
